Chapter 31: The Battle 
A Terrifying Outcome

I reached out to Steve. We were estranged, but I had heard through the grapevine that he had coded in the hospital, but was finally back home.
“Hey Steve!  How are you doing?  I heard through your daughter on Facebook that you have been sick.”
“Hi Derrick!  It is good to hear from you.  Yes, it has been pretty rough…”
And so restarted our relationship. But the conversation took a dark turn. 
“I heard that you nearly died. What happened?” I inquired.
“Well, I had been treated for throat cancer.  Four weeks after my treatment ended, my throat started bleeding badly.  Ultimately, I needed surgery and the surgeons rebuilt my throat and removed my larynx. I cannot speak.” 
I gasped. I reread the text.
“Oh my God. I, too, have been diagnosed with throat cancer.  P-16 positive. I just started treatment.”  I declared, my heart racing, chest tightening, as I gasped for air.
“Wait, what do you mean Derrick?” he asked incredulously
I repeated myself.
“I too have throat cancer.” I repeated as the gravity of the situation sunk it to both of us.
“Can we meet?” I asked.
“Yes,” he offered.
When I met with Steve I saw a shadow of his former self. He had lost over 20 pounds after a long stint in a hospital and months long recovery in a rehab center.  The booming baritone voice that so identified him was gone, replaced by total silence. His home that he had so meticulously constructed with his architect’s eye was sold to pay for health care expenses, replaced with a small garden style apartment, so common for such an uncommon man. 
We talked for hours.  Or should I say I talked and he typed on his iPad.  We knew each other well enough that I could guess what he was trying to say and I’d help the conversation along by saying it aloud to save him the work of  one finger pecking one slow letter at a time. He would shake his head up and down and point to me if I got it right, and left and right if I got it wrong. The method was tedious, but effective.
The caring man who had adopted a young girl and raised her as his own had resurfaced to replace the stubborn, scared, and overbearing man that I had run away from. 
Steve detailed his trials.  He too had P-16 positive cancer.  It was supposed to be curable if caught early as his cancer was. But something went terribly wrong.  When the bleeding began in his throat the doctors prescribed Hyperbaric treatment. It failed..  Everything failed.  When he lost consciousness his family had to make a difficult decision.  Remove his larynx and replace a section of his throat or … death. 
Steve was quick to reassure me that my fate would be different.  It had to be different, we both needed to believe.
Steve needed to regain his strength, so we started a regular regimen of walking.  Our first walk  along the lovely Sawyer Creek Trail was a favorite of mine.  The 6.5 mile trail curves around the Crystal Springs Reservoir.  We walked two miles and then back, noting each half mile marker as a major accomplishment. We interrupted our journey first by voluntary stops to take in the beautiful scenery but later by Steve’s need for oxygen and rest. Steve would control his breathing during these breaks, driven less by his lung capacity and more by his weak racing heart’s need for rest. The more rest Steve needed, the more I tried to interpret his thoughts, suggesting completions to the messages he typed on his iPhone messages. The gentle rolling hills curved around the source of our drinking water on this cool windless day. After 4.5 hours, we completed the 4 mile walk.
Steve thanked me profusely, later telling me that he vomited that night from over-exertion.
After several weeks of attending to his needs, I gradually pulled back. The shock of Steve’s outcome was ultimately too much to bear. Steve was right. He and I were two different people. I would have a different outcome, and now was not the time for excessive empathy.  With some guilt, I slowly pulled away, justifying it by reminding myself that we were estranged for a reason. I just could not handle the weight.
Friends and Family
I told my closest friends and family. Vince and Ellis introduced me to friends who had survived the same cancer. Vince’s friend Stephanie had survived surgery and chemotherapy treatment five years ago.  She warned me that my friends and family may not be truly able to empathize with me.  Some would be so distraught that they could only focus on their feelings.  Others would be so afraid that they would put up an emotional wall.  Few would truly listen and hear my needs. Her words were prophetic.
Ellis’s friend had chemo-radiation twelve years ago.  His pain was so bad that he was on heavy narcotics for nearly two months.  He could remember very little of his ordeal, but incredulously said that it was the best experience of his life.
At 3 Bees Coffee in San Mateo, I met Wade and his wife Lorraine.  Wade has survived chemo-radiation for the same cancer two years ago.  He also had very challenging side effects, but had learned to ameliorate them over time.
But it was my family’s response to my cancer that hit the hardest.  Jamil was crushed with anguish. The night after I told him, he sobbed uncontrollably.  
Gina had been planning to retire in January 2024, but wanted to provide a smooth transition for her patients by providing each of the 2000+ patients with an introduction to a new doctor who would attend to their primary care needs.  Instead, she immediately took several weeks off work to shuttle me to my appointments and attend to my needs.
Maya and husband Harold flew up from Los Angeles and stayed at our home for seven weeks as I went through the roughest period of the treatment.  


Derrick gets radiation at Kaiser Cancer Treatment Center, South San Francisco
December 3, 2023

At the start of each radiation session, the technician immobilized my head by screwing a custom molded green mesh mask that I wore like armour into the table on which I lay, pressing tightly against my face and leaving no room for any head motion. 
“Don’t swallow. Don’t swallow” came the commands over the speaker from the control room on the other side of the wall.
“Ok, you may swallow now.” 
I heard between the initial CT scan and the administration of therapeutic radiation to my neck and chin, finally making its way to my tumor and back out the back of my body.
“Don’t swallow Mr. Burns.  Don’t swallow,”  came the final command before the radiation.
The mask had been molded for my head and shoulders. Though I could see through, I simply closed my eyes and meditated. Instead of anxiety that gripped so many other such patients and required Xanax, I entered a Zen state that left me nearly asleep at the end of the 10 minute session. I trusted the process.
Chemotherapy proved even more challenging. The room had the capacity to treat three patients simultaneously.  But my six-and-a-half-hour marathon was longer than most, so a friend I would make at the beginning of my session would leave before I was done, so I listened to audiobooks and slept.
Debates raged among doctors about which therapy was harsher. For me, the answer lay in the gradual unveiling of side effects. Chemotherapy brought immediate nausea, countered by lethargy-inducing antiemetics. Radiation's effects were cumulative. Initially harmless, it eventually burned my neck, obliterated my sense of taste, leaving a persistent salt water flavor, destroyed my salivary glands, and caused throat pain requiring Gabapentin.
My appetite vanished, along with my sugar addiction. My once-beloved treats became a distant memory. I lost 42 pounds, a dramatic change that alarmed my medical team.
And the kicker, when the treatment ended, my side effects actually got worse.