Chapter 9: The Power of Belonging

I felt a mix of nerves and excitement about my first day at the
University of Detroit High School Jesuit Academy, U of D High, or just
The High, as people called it.

Mom dropped me off on her way to work at McDowell Elementary, just a
mile past U of D. It took her exactly 25 minutes to get me to school.
The first bell rang at 8:20 AM, and we had ten minutes to put our coats
in our lockers and find our first-period class.

As I walked into the building, the first thing I noticed was an office
to the right. A sign read, Dean of Students. I peeked in, curious.

"Hello! What's your name?" asked the woman behind the counter.

Her smile made me feel a little less nervous.

"I'm Derrick Burns," I said, trying to sound confident. "A new 7th
grader."

"Welcome, Derrick! I'm Mrs. Voss. Do you have your class schedule?"

"Yes, ma'am," I replied, handing over the neatly folded paper. It listed
my classes: Reading, Math 7, English 7, Art, Gym, Social Studies, and
Theology 7.

"Alright. Do you know where your first class is?"

"No, ma'am," I admitted.

"Go up the stairs past the library. At the top, turn left."

Walter was the one who told me about U of D. His mom and mine are
friends from church. Walter's an altar boy like me, but he's a year
older. He told me that U of D was great, most of the kids are smart, and
no one bothers him. That stuck with me. I didn't really know any
Catholics, though.

Mom calls it the "Jez-u-white Academy," which always makes me want to
laugh, but I never do!

Most of the kids I knew were Baptist, like me. Gerri, short for
Geraldine, is five years older than me and used to babysit me when I was
younger. She lives two doors down, and her family is Pentecostal. Her
dad, Elder Ellerbee, is the pastor of their storefront church, some
people call them the "Holy Rollers."

The U of D High Jesuit Academy is really just a fancy name for seventh
and eighth grade. I'm in homeroom 7A with Jimmy Latham, Jimmy Wardell,
and Ron Levi and about 20 other guys. Over half the guys are black.

I recognized Karl, Jerome, and Alan from the YMCA swimming class that
Mom enrolled me in this summer. Alan lives on Pennington just a few
blocks away from U of D. Most live nearby, but some of the white kids
take school buses in from the suburbs. A lot of the kids went to 6th
grade together at Gesu. Apparently, Gesu is also the name of their
church. I didn't know that some churches run schools.

When I walked into theology class, I remembered the church ceremony we
had to attend at the start of the year, called Mass. Everyone said
together:

"In the name of the Father, and of the Son…"

Afterward they made weird hand motions. I just stood there, confused. I
recognized the Holy Trinity, but the hand signs were totally new to me.
We didn't do anything like that at Metropolitan.

"Who's heard of Buddhism or Hinduism?" our teacher asked. A few kids
raised their hands.

"We'll be studying those, along with Animism, Zoroastrianism, Islam,
Paganism, Taoism, and Christianity," he said.

I wondered what those other religions were like.

Our theology teacher is a Jesuit priest or brother, I'm not sure what
the difference is. They all wear the same black shirt with a little
white collar that looks like a flat tie but not really. The Jesuits live
in a building attached to the school by a long breezeway. Weird. I
wondered if their families lived there too, but someone explained they
couldn't marry or have kids. That seemed so strange to me. Doctor
Morton, my pastor, is married and has two grown daughters. Why couldn't
priests marry?

After theology, I went to math class. I was glad for something familiar
but still excited to learn new stuff. Math homework was usually easy,
and I used to finish it on the bus home. But now, we were doing math I
didn't already understand.

Our teacher, Mr. Zybrad (pronounced "zee-bard"), isn't a priest and
isn't married either. I'm not sure what to make of him yet, but when he
smiles, his eyes nearly close, like a cat. He's the coolest teacher,
always cracking jokes while teaching at the same time.

"Mr. Burns!" he called out, tossing a piece of chalk at me.

But before he could ask me a question, he noticed some kids whispering.

"What's so interesting?" he asked.

"Paul bet on the Cowboys and won't pay up," someone said.

This weekend was the Super Bowl, and for some reason, everyone was
betting. I'm not a big sports fan, but I wanted to fit in, so I made a
bunch of bets. I thought I was being smart, I bet on the Steelers with
some guys and on the Cowboys with others, figuring I wouldn't lose any
money no matter who won. Genius, right?

Well, the Steelers won. I paid off the kids I lost to, but when I tried
to collect from the kids who owed me, they refused to pay! It was a
disaster.

Luckily, Mr. Zybrad came to the rescue. He knew a lot of kids had made
bets and that some weren't paying up. He made everyone settle their
debts right there in the classroom. I got my money back, but the other
kids looked at me like I was from another planet. No one could
understand why I'd bet both ways!

Getting Cut

As spring came, Mom noticed my body odor after P.E. "Wear deodorant or
take the bus," she said. I forgot the next day, so I started taking the
bus. Detroit winters made those bus rides miserable - waiting in the
cold for transfers, the plastic seats like ice through my pants. But at
least Harry, an upperclassman from U of D, was usually on the back of
the bus where it was warmer.

Around the same time, I decided to try out for baseball and track. I
played every weekend in the park and thought I could throw and hit a
baseball pretty well. But at tryouts, I was shocked to discover that
most of the other kids had already been on teams - Little League,
Catholic Youth Organization, all kinds of organized sports I'd never
heard of. They knew things about the games that I didn't even know I was
supposed to know.

When the lists went up, my name wasn't on either one. I'd been cut from
both teams. Walking home that day, I felt embarrassed and confused. How
was I supposed to know about all those other teams? Nobody had ever told
me.

Jimmy defended me when I told him about the betting disaster. "That was
actually smart, D," he said, though his grin suggested he found
something amusing about the whole situation. "You just didn't count on
people being dishonest."

I started spending more time with Jimmy. He mostly spared me from being
the target of his teasing, and he always made me laugh. When we had to
part at the end of the day, I always felt a bit sad, like I was leaving
behind something important.

Finding My Place

By lunch, our group had settled into a routine. Our lunch room featured
long tables and bench seating that unfolded from the walls. Mom sent me
a bag lunch, so I just needed to purchase my small carton of chocolate
milk and on those days that I could sneak a few coins from Mom's purse,
I'd buy an apple turnover from the vending machine for dessert.

When it was too cold to go outside, we'd head to the Commons - a big
room across from the cafeteria that used to be the gym. The room has an
overhead oval-shaped running track, and on the main floor are square
tables with steel chairs.

Jimmy was always making people laugh. Some kids teased him about his
front teeth sticking out, but if he cared, he hid it. There was
something familiar about Jimmy's laugh, something that made me feel at
home even though I'd just met him. Maybe it was the way he could turn
any situation into a joke, or how he seemed to understand exactly when
to pull back from teasing me.

Jimmy and I would scan the large room for an empty table. I spotted
Walter, Harry, and a bunch of other black kids there too, from all six
grades. Everyone seemed to get along, but I couldn't help noticing that,
just like at Law Middle School, the white kids mostly stuck together,
separate from the black kids.

We usually joined James Wardell, who we all called "Wardell." Jimmy
would make jokes about my clothes. He reminded me of the funny guys from
my neighborhood. When I tried to be funny like them, no one laughed.
Wardell seemed to know better. He never made fun of anyone.

Wardell knew a number of our classmates from Chrysler Elementary in
Lafayette Park, east of downtown, including some of the white kids, but
the majority came from Gesu Elementary. Walter was the only kid I knew.

A World of My Own

While Jimmy found his element making people laugh and I was learning to
navigate the social dynamics of U of D, I discovered something else that
captured my imagination completely: computers.

It started with BYTE Magazine. Mom had been supporting my reading habit
since elementary school, and by seventh grade, my magazine subscriptions
had evolved from Highlights to more sophisticated reads like Psychology
Today and Chess Life. But nothing fascinated me quite like those glossy
photos of the new Radio Shack TRS-80 computer. The machine looked like
our small black and white TV, but with a thick detached keyboard.

"Dad, can we get a TRS-80?"

"A what?" He'd look up briefly from his newspaper, his face carrying
that patient expression I knew so well.

"A computer, Dad. Look at this." I'd hold out the magazine, trying to
make him see what I saw - not just a machine, but a future.

"What are you going to use that for?"

"I don't know. Write programs!" The words came out eager but vague. I
couldn't articulate why this mattered so much, why this machine felt
like a key to something important.

"For my birthday Dad? Please????" I pleaded.

"We'll see," he offered in the same voice that he used when I asked to
play board games when he was reading the paper.

But I happily heard in my mind a definitive "Yes." So when my birthday
came and went, no TRS-80 appeared. I sulked, not understanding then that
the $600-$1000 cost of my dream machine represented several weeks of
Dad's take-home pay from TACOM.

The computer remained an impossible dream, but the magazines kept
coming. Each issue of BYTE was like a window into another world - one
where people spoke in languages of BASIC and FORTRAN, where problems
could be solved with elegant lines of code.

My real introduction to computing happened in a tiny room across from
the cafeteria at U of D. The space itself was unremarkable, maybe five
by five feet, with institutional beige walls and the lingering funk that
only teenage boys can create. But to me, it was an amusement park.

At its heart sat a TTY-33 Teletype terminal, connected via a modem to a
computer at the University of Detroit on McNichols. The machine's
mechanical chattering filled the room like music, each keystroke a
percussion note, each linefeed a drumroll.

After school and during lunch, while other kids headed off to sports,
clubs, or hung out in the Commons, I'd slip into that room and wait for
my turn to play the Star Trek game, written in 1971.

"Scan the battlefield!" "Fire a torpedo!" "Enter warp speed!"

I'd shout at whoever was playing, caught up in the action, until it was
finally my turn to take the captain's chair. But it wasn't just about
playing, it was about understanding.

TTY-33 Terminal

I'd carefully print sections of the program onto endless rolls of yellow
paper, the text crawling out at a glacial 110 baud, half the speed of an
average human reader. Each printout was a treasure, a manuscript of
mysteries.

Later, at home, I'd unroll one across the den floor, scanning the lines
of code like an archaeologist deciphering an ancient script:

10 REM STAR TREK - MIKE MAYFIELD, CENTERLINE ENGINEERING
20 FOR I=1 TO 8:FOR J=1 TO 8:K[I,J]=0:NEXT J:NEXT I
30 DIM G[8,8],C[9,2],K[8,8],N[3],Z[8,8]

Who was this Mike Mayfield? And how did he make a computer, this cold,
mechanical thing, create entire universes?

The variables danced before my eyes, G for galaxy, K for Klingons, Z for
starbases. Line by line, I traced the code, piecing together how it
shaped the gameplay. When I finally got my hands on the slow terminal
again, I'd experiment, tweaking a few lines just to see what would
happen. Like a painter adding a brushstroke, I leaned back, admiring the
changes I had set in motion.

When I played the game, I was an armed starship commander seeking out my
Klingon prey. As I navigated the unknown universe of the game, I felt a
freedom that I had never experienced before. In that computer room,
alone with the mechanical sounds and glowing screen, I was safe. I
didn't have to contend with anyone else's emotions. I had no one to
impress or disappoint. The random events in the game were so much easier
to navigate than the apparently random swings of friendship and social
dynamics. With no one to judge me, and nothing to fear, I could be at
peace. I could be me.

While other kids threw their attention to sports, art, and social
hierarchies, I threw mine into the pursuit of knowledge in this
incredibly new world of computing. I didn't mind the solitary nature. In
fact, I relished it! The computer didn't care about my need to prove
myself. It responded only to logic, to precision, to getting things
right. Maybe that's why I loved it so much. I knew and understood all
the rules.

Mr. Christopher Buryta, our math teacher, noticed my constant presence
in the computer room. When he told me about the Mathematics Club at
Lawrence Institute of Technology, Dad agreed to drive me to their
monthly Saturday morning meetings. The club featured lectures and
programming competitions, including a monthly battleship game where we
had to write programs to play like humans.

Just as he drove me to countless other activities, Dad would drive me to
the data entry room with keypunch machines. He supplied me with stacks
of blank cream-colored cards and coding paper that he got from work. I
wonder who he petitioned for these things. The cards would stack up,
each one representing a line of code. One mistake meant starting over -
no quick backspace key, no easy fixes.

Dad waited patiently during these competitions, probably reading his
newspaper or dozing in the car. He never complained about the long
hours, never asked why this mattered so much.

"How'd it go?" "Did you win?"

And he would listen patiently as I relayed the scoring of each round.

"Ready to head home?"

"Yes. Thanks Dad," I hope that I said it each time!

Dad couldn't help me with the actual programming - this was as foreign
to him as his world of darkroom chemicals was to me. But like those long
hours we spent in cars, we both understood the comfort of focused
solitude. He could provide the space for me to chase whatever this dream
was, just as he'd provided the space for me to find my voice.

I never did beat the same two Asian-American students who always seemed
to win. But in that cold computer room, punching cards and chasing
victories, I was learning lessons that went beyond programming syntax:
about persistence, about the difference between winning and succeeding,
and about finding a place where I could be completely myself.

Summers Change

After getting cut from both baseball and basketball teams, I threw
myself into reading. At least with books, no one could cut you from the
team. And unlike sports, reading came naturally to me. Walter had warned
me that we'd be reading a lot more at U of D, and he wasn't kidding! I
hadn't read this many books before, but I was starting to enjoy it. My
favorite so far was George Orwell's Animal Farm.

Mr. Bankston gave us a summer reading list, and I was excited. We could
earn credit for reading any book on the list, or even other books, as
long as we passed a test on the content in September.

The last day of seventh grade felt like it would never end. Still, my
mind was already on summer: swimming at the Y, playing in the park, and
wondering where we'd go on vacation.

Gerri challenged me to read Jaws, and I finished it in just a few days.
I had committed to read Great Expectations for school credit, thinking
of all the points I would earn for such a thick book. We got one point
for each page, but I got bored halfway through and never finished it.

That summer, like always, I spent Sundays at church. By this time, I was
almost too old for Primary Church. Sometimes, I'd sit with Mom in the
main sanctuary. The moment Pastor Morton said, "Amen," I'd already be
looking at Mom, ready to bolt.

"Mom, can I go now?"

"Yes, Derrick," she'd say, waving me off.

The basement always smelled like coffee and whatever Deacon Modest was
cooking. Through the kitchen pass-through, I'd see him in his giant
white chef's hat, sweat dripping down his face.

"Hello, Mr. Modest! What are you making?"

"Hey, Derrick! Tonight, we're having meatloaf, cornbread, collard
greens, candied yams, and black-eyed peas."

I'd gulp down as much red punch as I could while walking around with my
biggest Sunday smile, being polite to all the church ladies just like
Mom taught me.

"Mom, can I go to the library?"

"Yes, but be back in 30 minutes," she replied.

I climbed the three flights of stairs to the Youth Library, a small room
with eight free-standing metal paperback racks. Ever since the books
were donated, I'd spent every Sunday exploring the shelves. I'd already
read The Hobbit and found the entire Narnia series.

Doctor Morton's office was on the way back. "Derrick! Come in, come in,"
he said warmly. When I showed him the Narnia books, he smiled like he
was letting me in on a special secret. "Add those to your personal
collection. Take them. I'm sure you'll make great use of them."

When I got home, the books felt like a treasure. For the first time, I
felt like I was building something that was just mine.

On the last day of school, Jimmy caught up with me after the final bell.

"What are you doing this summer, D?"

"We usually go on vacation in August, and I'll probably do swim lessons
again," I said.

"We should hang out! Come by my house in Oak Park."

"Where's Oak Park?" I asked. I didn't know much about the Detroit
suburbs, except for Warren, where Dad worked.

"Near the zoo!" Jimmy laughed. "Come on over!"

"I'll ask my dad to bring me."

The Discovery

Jimmy's mom looked old like my mom and his dad had died. Except for
David Ragland, I didn't know of any other kids without two parents at
home.

"My parents are old too. Actually, I was adopted," I said.

Jimmy stopped what he was doing and looked directly at me.

"Really?! So was I!"

I couldn't believe it. In all my years, I'd never met another adopted
kid my age.

"No way! Have you always known?" I asked.

"Uh huh."

"What about your sister?"

"She was adopted, too."

And then Jimmy fell silent, something I had rarely seen at school. Jimmy
told me that his mom is a social worker. I shared that my mom is a
teacher.

"Levi is adopted too," he offered.

"What?!" I couldn't believe Ron Levi too? Three of us?

"What do you know about your adoption?" I asked.

"Not much, except that I was born at Crittenton Hospital. Levi too," he
answered.

Now it was my turn to be silent.

"What is your birthdate?"

And then I did the math in my head. Jimmy and I had been in the same
hospital at the same time!

For the first time in my life, I wasn't the only one. Dave was my
brother and adopted too, but he'd come to our family when he was four -
he remembered his life before. Jimmy was different. He was my age, smart
like me, and adopted at birth from the same hospital. He'd always known
he was adopted, just like me. There was someone else exactly like me!
Someone who understood what it meant to be chosen by your family instead
of just born into it. Someone who wondered about the same things I
couldn't even put into words.

I saved the news for when I got home.

"Jimmy was adopted and was born at Crittenton too," I announced!

"Really?!" Mom said.

She had talked to Mrs. Latham before my visit to make sure that it was
ok for me to come. I don't know if they talked about adoption, but Mom
didn't seem very surprised.

"Yes, and he says that another classmate was too!" I said.

"A lot of unwed mothers went to Crittenton to deliver their baby before
giving the baby up for adoption," she told me.

Crittenton Hospital stood as a landmark on East Grand Boulevard, its
brick walls holding countless secrets. I wondered how many other stories
like mine, Jimmy's, and Levi's started there.

"Can we go by there again?"

Dad had driven us by there before. It was along the same route that we
would take downtown to the Auto Show at Cobo Hall or the fireworks on
the river. Mom would always point the building out.

"I think the hospital is closed, but we can drive by," Dad said.

On the drive to Crittenton, I thought about what Jimmy had told me.
Three boys from the same small school, all born in the same hospital,
all adopted. As we pulled up to the building, I stared at those brick
walls differently now.

This was where our stories had started - not because of who our birth
parents were, but because we'd all been babies who needed families to
choose us.

I thought about how much I liked to be around Jimmy. He mostly spared me
from being the target of his teasing. He always made me laugh. And I
always felt a bit sad when we parted.

And as I took in the news, it hit me. U of D had already started to feel
like home, but now it was different. In Jimmy, I'd found more than just
a friend or classmate - I'd found a brother. We shared more than just a
birth hospital or adoption stories; we shared an understanding that went
deeper than blood.

Sometimes family finds you in the most unexpected places.

Brother Jimmy

Jimmy was now Brother Jimmy.

I couldn't wait to tell Dave about Jimmy. Having one brother had changed
my life; now I had two.

That summer, everything changed. What I'd been looking for without
knowing it had been right there at U of D all along - not just a school,
but a brother. Dave had shown me what having a brother meant, but Jimmy
showed me that sometimes the family you're meant to have finds you. As I
looked at the old hospital building, I realized that some beginnings
take years to understand.

University of Detroit Jesuit High School main building, c. 2022

Derrick and Doctor Charles E. Morton, c. 1995

Crittenton Maternity Home on Woodrow Wilson , c 1970
Now is Cass Community Social Services.
